ETHICAL DECISION MAKING
Utilitarianism
The Context: a wind of change
◦ 18th and 19th Centuries – legal & political transformation
◦ Rise of individuality and individual rights
◦ American Revolution (1776)
◦ “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all persons are created equal, that they are
endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty
and the pursuit of happiness. To secure these rights, governments are instituted among
persons, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed”.
◦ French Revolution (1789)
◦ “Human beings are born and remain free and equal in rights. Social distinctions can be
founded only on the common good”.
◦ Positivism  universalism
◦ generalization, rationalism, “the laws of human society”
Utilitarianism: Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832)
◦ Two sovereign masters of human nature
◦ “Pleasure and pain govern us in all we do, in all we say, in all we think”.
◦ Actions are approved when they are such as to promote happiness (or pleasure)
and disapproved when they have a tendency to cause unhappiness (or pain).
◦ Main principles of utilitarianism
◦ “utility is whatever produces happiness and pleasure, and whatever prevents pain
and suffering”
◦ “maximizing happiness, the overall balance of pleasure over pain”
◦ “the greatest happiness for the greatest number”
Utilitarianism: Jeremy Bentham
◦ instrumental and consequntialist understanding of “the good”
◦ no account of intrinsic good; all actions are good or bad because of their
consequences
◦ instrumental understanding of justice
◦ “The dictates of justice are nothing more than a part of the dictates of
benevolence.”
◦ What is a good and/or just action instrumental for?
Limits of Bentham’s Utilitarianism: Self-
Financing House for Beggars and Poor
Bentham observed, first of all, that encountering beggars on the streets reduces
the happiness of passersby, in two ways. For tenderhearted souls, the sight of a
beggar produces the pain of sympathy; for hardhearted folk, it generates the pain
of disgust. Either way, encountering beggars reduces the utility of the general
public. So, he suggested a solution: Any citizen who encountered a beggar would
be empowered to apprehend him and take him to the nearest workhouse. Once
confined there, each beggar would have to work to pay off the cost of his or her
maintenance, which would be tallied in a “self-liberation account.” The account
would include food, clothing, bedding, medical care, and a life insurance policy.
Limits of Bentham’s Utilitarianism: 
Panopticon
◦ panoptes – “all seeing”
◦ a type of institutional building and a system of
control
◦ all prisoners of an institution to be observed by a
single security guard, without the inmates being able to
tell whether they are being watched
◦ if the prisoners of the panopticon prison could be seen
but never knew when they were watched, the prisoners
would need to follow the rules.
◦ also suitable for factories, asylums, hospitals, and
schools

Limits of Bentham’s Utilitarianism: 
Panopticon

LIMITS OF BENTHAM’S 
UTILITARIANISM: 
PANOPTICON
Limits of Bentham’s Utilitarianism: 
Benefits of Lung Cancer
“Philip Morris, the tobacco company, does big business in the Czech Republic, where
cigarette smoking remains popular and socially acceptable. Worried about the rising
health care costs of smoking, the Czech government recently considered raising taxes on
cigarettes. In hopes of fending off the tax increase, Philip Morris commissioned a cost-
benefit analysis of the effects of smoking on the Czech national budget. The study found
that the government actually gains more money than it loses from smoking. The reason:
although smokers impose higher medical costs on the budget while they are alive, they
die early, and so save the government considerable sums in health care, pensions, and
housing for the elderly. According to the study, once the “positive effects” of smoking are
taken into account—including cigarette tax revenues and savings due to the premature
deaths of smokers—the net gain to the treasury is $147 million per year” (Sandel, 2009).
Limits of Bentham’s Utilitarianism
◦ criticisms towards Bentham’s utilitarianism
◦ fails to respect individual / minority rights
◦ aggregates all values and preferences in money or benefit by calculation
◦ suggests a kind of psychological egoism
◦ a possible lack of ignoring the long-run consequences
Utilitarianism: John Stuart Mill (1806-1876)
“It is proper to state that I forego any advantage which could be derived to
my argument from the idea of abstract right, as a thing independent of
utility. I regard utility as the ultimate appeal on all ethical questions; but it
must be utility in the largest sense, grounded on the permanent interests
of [human] as a progressive being.”
Utilitarianism: John Stuart Mill
“From the winter of 1821, when I first read Bentham . . . I had what might truly be called
an object in life; to be a reformer of the world. My conception of my own life was entirely
identified with this object. . . . But the time came when I awakened from this as from a
dream. It was in the autumn of 1826. I was in a dull state of nerves, such as everybody is
occasionally liable to; unsusceptible to enjoyment or pleasurable excitement. . . . In this
frame of mind it occurred to me to put the question directly to myself: “Suppose that all
your objects in life were realized; that all the changes in institutions and opinions which
you are looking forward to, could be completely effected at this very instant: would this be
a great joy and happiness to you?” And an irrepressible self-consciousness distinctly
answered, “No!” At this my heart sank within me: the whole foundation on which my life
was constructed fell down. . . . I seemed to have nothing left to live for. . . . If I had loved
anyone sufficiently to make confiding my griefs a necessity, I should not have been in the
condition I was” (Mill, Autobiography).
Mill: Correcting Bentham’s Utilitarianism
Harm Principle
◦ People should be free to do whatever they want, provided they do no
harm to others.
◦ The only actions for which a person is accountable to society are those
that affect others. As long as a person does not harm anyone, their
“independence is absolute. Over themselves, over their own body and
mind, the individual is sovereign”.
Case Study: Exploding gas tanks
During the 1970s, the Ford Pinto was one of the best-selling cars in the United States.
Unfortunately, its fuel tank was prone to explode when another car collided with it from the
rear. More than five hundred people died, and many more suffered severe burn injuries. It
emerged that Ford engineers had been aware of the danger posed by the gas tank. But
company executives had conducted a cost-benefit analysis and determined that the benefits
of fixing it were not worth the $11 per car.
To calculate the benefits to be gained by a safer gas tank, Ford estimated that 180 deaths and
180 burn injuries would result if no changes were made. It then placed a monetary value on
each life lost and injury suffered ($200,000 per life, and $67,000 per injury). It calculated that
the overall benefit of not fixing the car would be about $88 million. So the company concluded
that the cost of fixing the fuel tank was not worth the benefits of a safer car.
Source: Michael Sandel, Justice: What is the Right Thing to Do?
Limits of Bentham’s Utilitarianism:
long-term consequences
Shortly before he died, Bentham asked himself a
question consistent with his philosophy: Of what use
could a dead man be to the living? One use, he
concluded, would be to make one’s corpse available for
the study of anatomy. In the case of great philosophers,
however, better yet to preserve one’s physical presence
in order to inspire future generations of thinkers.
Bentham put himself in this second category.

John Stuart Mill on Individual/Minority 
Rights and Freedom of Speech
◦ Dissenters usually question the value judgments of society. In this way, our ideas will be
freed from turning into a dogma/prejudice, and will be proven right or wrong.
Questioning process may create a social improvement.
◦ The people who question and dissent the common values of society protect the
members of the society (majority) from conformism. When conventional ideas of
majority are not questioned, they will lose their meanings; and the society will lack of
liveliness.
◦ Persons learn freedom only through discussing and questioning their ideas. Free
persons are able to govern themselves. The ones who do not have their own opinions
and unable to question them cannot develop the capacity to be free. Therefore, they will
need a “father figure” to govern them. Freedom (of speech) is against paternalism.
Utilitarianism: John Stuart Mill
◦ “Forcing a person to live according to custom or convention or prevailing opinion
is wrong, Mill explains, because it prevents her from achieving the highest end
of human life—the full and free development of her human faculties. Conformity,
in Mill’s account, is the enemy of the best way to live.”
◦ We need to respect individual rights and freedom of each and every person in
order to pursue a good/just life.
◦ short-run and long run utilities  qualitative instead of quantitative calculation
of utility
Utilitarianism: John Stuart Mill
“The human faculties of perception, judgment, discriminative feeling,
mental activity, and even moral preference, are exercised only in making a
choice. She who does anything because it is the custom, makes no choice.
She gains no practice either in discerning or in desiring what is best. The
mental and moral, like the muscular powers, are improved only by being
used… He who lets the world, or his own portion of it, choose his plan of
life for him, has no need of any other faculty than the ape-like one of
imitation. He who chooses his plan for himself, employs all his faculties.”
Utilitarianism: John Stuart Mill
◦ “It is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better
to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. And if the fool, or the pig,
are of a different opinion, it is because they only know their own side of
the question.”
◦ “Justice is a name for certain moral requirements, which, regarded
collectively, stand higher in the scale of social utility and are therefore of
paramount obligation than any others.”
Utilitarianism: John Stuart Mill
◦ long-run interests of human kind  progress / improvement
◦ personal liberty  harm principle
◦ liberty to govern our own affairs  unlimited right to freedom of speech
◦ liberty for women as well as men  liberation of women
John Stuart Mill on Women’s Rights
◦ The Subjection of Women (1869)
◦ “the legal subordination of one sex to another – is wrong in itself, and now
one of the chief hindrances to human improvement; and that it ought to be
replaced by a system of perfect equality, admitting no power and privilege on
the one side, nor disability on the other.”
◦ noble or peasant, each and every man is equal concerning the right to
dominate women
◦ men do not only demand women to submit, they also want them to become
their slaves voluntarily
John Stuart Mill on Women’s Rights
◦ education for subjection: family as “school of despotism”
◦ “Not a word can be said for despotism in the family that can’t be said for political
despotism. Not every absolute king sits at his window to enjoy the groans of his
tortured subjects, or strips them of their last rag and turns them out to shiver in the
road.”
◦ moral training of humankind will never be satisfactory until it has as a basis a morally
satisfactory family structure
◦ inequality between sexes create a severe disrespect and contempt
◦ individual and citizenship rights of women should be recognized
Dudley and Stevens vs. the Queen
In the summer of 1884, four English sailors were stranded at sea in a small
lifeboat in the South Atlantic, over a thousand miles from land. Their ship, the
Mignonette, had gone down in a storm, and they had escaped to the lifeboat, with
only two cans of preserved turnips and no fresh water. Thomas Dudley was the
captain, Edwin Stephens was the first mate, and Edmund Brooks was a sailor—
“all men of excellent character,” according to newspaper accounts.
The fourth member of the crew was the cabin boy, Richard Parker, age seventeen.
He was an orphan, on his first long voyage at sea. He had signed up against the
advice of his friends, “in the hopefulness of youthful ambition,” thinking the
journey would make a man of him. Sadly, it was not to be.
Dudley and Stevens vs. the Queen
From the lifeboat, the four stranded sailors watched the horizon, hoping a ship
might pass and rescue them. For the first three days, they ate small rations of
turnips. On the fourth day, they caught a turtle. They subsisted on the turtle and
the remaining turnips for the next few days. And then for eight days, they ate
nothing.
By now Parker, the cabin boy, was lying in the corner of the lifeboat. He had drunk
seawater, against the advice of the others, and become ill. He appeared to be
dying. On the nineteenth day of their ordeal, Dudley, the captain, suggested
drawing lots to determine who would die so that the others might live. But Brooks
refused, and no lots were drawn.
Dudley and Stevens vs. the Queen
The next day came, and still no ship was in sight. Dudley told Brooks to avert his
gaze and motioned to Stephens that Parker had to be killed. Dudley offered a
prayer, told the boy his time had come, and then killed him with a penknife,
stabbing him in the jugular vein. Brooks emerged from his conscientious
objection to share in the gruesome bounty. For four days, the three men fed on
the body and blood of the cabin boy.
And then help came. Dudley describes their rescue in his diary, with staggering
euphemism: “On the 24th day, as we were having our breakfast,” a ship
appeared at last. The three survivors were picked up. Upon their return to
England, they were arrested and tried. Brooks turned state’s witness. Dudley and
Stephens went to trial. They freely confessed that they had killed and eaten
Parker. They claimed they had done so out of necessity.
Dudley and Stevens vs. the Queen
Suppose you were the judge. How would you rule?
To simplify things, put aside the question of law and assume that you were
asked
◦ to decide whether eating the cabin boy was morally permissible.
◦ to decide whether killing the cabin boy was morally permissible.
Dudley and Stevens vs. the Queen
Argument of the Defense:
Given the dire circumstances, it was necessary to kill one person in order
to save three. Had no one been killed and eaten, all four would likely have
died. Parker, weakened and ill, was the logical candidate, since he would
soon have died anyway. And unlike Dudley and Stephens, he had no
dependents. His death deprived no one of support and left no grieving wife
or children.
The Blacksmith and the Baker
Once upon a time there was a small town where the town blacksmith was a mean man.
He had an enemy, and one day he and his enemy happened to meet at an inn. They
proceeded to get drunk and exchange some nasty words. The blacksmith grew angry and
knocked the other man out; the blow turned out to be fatal. The blacksmith was carted off
to jail, and he confessed, hoping that his opponent would forgive him in Heaven. Before
his sentence was pronounced, four upstanding citizens asked to see the judge, and the
most eloquent of them spoke:
“Your Wisdom, we know you are thinking of the welfare of this town, but this welfare
depends on getting our blacksmith back. His death won’t wake up the dead man, and
we’ll never find such a good blacksmith ever again.”
The judge said, “But a life has been taken and must be paid for by a life. . . .”
The Blacksmith and the Baker
“We have in town an old and scrawny baker who’ll go to the devil soon, and since
we have two bakers, how about taking the oldest one? Then you still get a life for
a life.”
“Well,” said the judge, “that is not a bad idea, I’ll do what I can.” And he leafed
through his law books but found nothing that said you can’t execute a baker
instead of a blacksmith, so he pronounced this sentence:
“We know that blacksmith Jens has no excuse for what he has done, sending
Anders Petersen off to eternity; but since we have but one blacksmith in this
town, I would be crazy if I wanted him dead; but we do have two bakers of bread .
. . so the oldest one must pay for the murder.”