Lecture 01: File System and 
Commands
CE350: Linux Utilities and Shell Scripting
Çağlar Durmaz
Previously on UNIX
● Course introduction, file system navigation, bash, anatomy of the command, 
absolute and relative paths. 
● Make sure you watch it on Panopto, if you have missed it. 
● Exercises?
Previously on UNIX
● Course introduction, file system navigation, bash, anatomy of the command, 
absolute and relative paths. 
● Make sure you watch it on Panopto, if you have missed it. 
● Exercises?
● There is a program on the command line for almost every desktop application. 
Find following command line applications: a web browser, music player, 
instant messaging, e-mail, text editor, download manager, torrent client, 
calendar, role playing game. 
ls in detail
● Giving the ls command lists the contents of the current directory. 
● We can supply a path as an argument to list the file and directories in that 
path. 
● The path is usually a directory, but it can also be a file. 
● Why would we need to list only one file? 
● If we need to get information about a file, like its size, permissions, etc., we 
can use the -l option of the ls command. 
● Check out the following screenshot. 
ls in detail
● The first column, -rw-r--r-- shows the access permissions, which we will 
discuss in detail later. 
● The next one (1) shows the file’s number of hard links. 
● The next two columns show the user and the group who owns the file. 
● The column with a large number 1099646 is the file size in bytes. 
● It is followed by the date of the last modification, and the name of the file. 
● This is very much like right clicking a file, choosing properties, which brings up 
a window with all this information. 
ls in detail
● It is very hard to decide how large the file is: 1099646 bytes. Is it around 
1MB? 
● We can use the “human readable” option, h, to reprint the output. (Yes it is 
1.1MB)
● There are other options as well. 
● The following table is from Shotts Jr. (2012). 
Viewing Files
● Now that we can navigate the filesystem, let’s concentrate on files. 
● There are a lot of file types, like photos, music, office documents, etc. 
● We know their types by looking at their file extensions (JPG, MP3, DOCX)
● In Linux, the extension is not required. You can use the file command to 
determine a file’s type.
● In Linux, “everything is a file”. ( Here, it would be better to quote the following: 
“Everything is a file descriptor or a process”, ref: Linus Torvalds, 
https://yarchive.net/comp/linux/everything_is_file.html )
Viewing Files
● As computer scientists, you are aware that there are text files, which are in 
human readable text format, like txt, cpp, and there are binary files, where we 
cannot see the contents without a program, like an image viewer, which 
understands their content. 
● You can see the file contents on the command line in a few different ways. I’ll 
start with the cat command. 
Viewing Files
● The cat command actually concatenates and prints files. It is mostly used to 
combine two or more files. 
● The output of this combination is printed to the screen. 
● If only one file is given, that file is written to the screen. We will just abuse that 
feature. 
● So, let’s assume that there are two text files, one called dorian.txt, which 
contains a sample paragraph from Oscar Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray, 
and one called getopt_long.c, which is a C file that we will use in the following 
weeks. 
Viewing Files
● We can easily see the contents of dorian.txt with the cat command, because 
the file is short, only eight lines. 
● The screen has 25 lines to 80 columns by default, so the file fits the screen.
● Unfortunately, the same cannot be said about the getopt_long.c file, which 
has fiftyseven lines. 
● The output fills the screen and only the last 25 lines can be seen. 
● You can use Shift + Page Up and Shift + Page Down to scroll the output, but 
it has a limit. If the file is longer than the limit, we would be missing 
information. 
Viewing Files
● Let me introduce: more. 
● If file is longer than the screen size, more displays until the screen is filled, 
and waits for the user to press ENTER to continue line by line. 
● You can load a file by simply passing the path as an argument:
more getopt_long.c
● You can quit with the q key. 
Viewing Files: less is more
● less can show the contents of a file one screen at a time, allows you to go 
back and forth, search the file, etc. 
● You can use the up and down arrow keys, or the page up and down keys. 
● You can quit with the q key. 
● You can load a file by passing the path as an argument:
less getopt_long.c
● We can search within the text as follows:
Viewing Files: less is more
● Once you load a file, you can use the forward slash key, /, to enter a string to 
search (Shift+7 on Turkish layout). 
● This starts a text input line on the bottom left corner. 
● For example, enter const as a search string if you have getopt_long.c open 
and hit ENTER. 
● The matched words will be highlighted. 
● If you want to move to the next match, just hit / followed by an ENTER without 
entering a search string. 
● Notice that man command uses this interface to display a command’s manual 
page. You can use these features there, as well.
A new command: wc
● How did I know that getopt_long.c contained 57 lines? 
● There is a command called wc that counts words, lines, characters or bytes. 
● By default it shows lines, words and bytes contained in the input file. 
● The -l option displays only the number of lines. 
Command Line vs. Graphical User Interface
● You might still think that using a mouse is easier. 
…, how could we copy all the HTML files from one directory to another, but only 
copy files that do not exist in the destination directory or are newer than the versions 
in the destination directory? 
from “The Linux Command Line”, by William E. Shotts, Jr. 2012
Wildcards
● Before we begin, we need to learn about the wildcards. 
● They are a feature of the shell that help us select a group of files by using 
special characters. 
● In the following weeks, we will learn about regular expressions (RE). 
● Wildcards and RE are different, but use similar special characters. 
● It is easy to get them mixed up. So it is important that you understand the 
wildcards well.
● Here is the basic wildcards from Shotts’ book. 

Wildcards
● Let’s try a few examples. We will be using ls. 
● The star, *, matches any number of characters. 
● So if you want to list all the files that end with jpg:
ls *jpg
● You can use it between strings, like files that start with slides and end with 
pdf can be listed as:
ls slides*pdf
Wildcards
● The question mark, ?, matches a single character. 
● You can use it to say that you expect any character in that position of the 
string. For example 
ls ka?a
selects files such as kaza, kara, kaya, kaba, … 
● You can use as many as required:
ls *.p??
selects files such as slide00.pdf, sshot.png
Wildcards
● The square brackets [], matches one character from a set of characters. 
● For example: 
ls s[aei]z 
selects files such as saz, sez, siz, but not soz, suz. 
● Here is a very common way to use it:
ls [Pp]roblem[Ss]olving.pdf
● You can also use exclamation mark, !, to negate the selection. 
ls s[!aei]z 
this time file names saz, sez, siz will not be selected, but files such as soz, 
suz will be selected.
More Wildcards
● There are other wildcards that might improve your selection possibilities. 
● Similar to matching a single character from a set of characters, we can also 
match set of characters. 
● The curly braces define a list of strings that you can use to match.
ls f{oo,aa,umble}* 
matches file names that start with f, continued with one of the strings in the 
curly braces, and end with any character (*). 
More Wildcards
● It is also possible to match a range of characters.
● What if you want to select file names that start with an alphabetic character, 
followed by a number and ends with png? 
ls [abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz][0123456789]png
● The ranges save us the burden of long wildcards: 
ls [a-z][0-9]png
● What if we want to use both uppercase and lowercase letters?
ls [a-zA-Z][0-9]png
More Wildcards
● Class definitions, as given in (Shotts, Jr., 2012).
● If the full range is required, then you can use the class definitions. If another 
range is required, such as i to m, or 3 to 7, then the range syntax can be 
used. 
● Here’s the same command using class definitions:
ls [[:lower:]][[:digit:]]png

Basic Commands
● We now know how to navigate the filesystem, list directories, select or view 
files. Let’s take a look at other commands that we need to learn. 
● mkdir: Create a new directory by giving the path of the new directory:
mkdir ce350
mkdir /home/koguz/Desktop/hw01
● You can also give more than one path. In that case, mkdir will create all of 
them
mkdir dir1 dir2 dir3 dir4
Basic Commands
● cp: copies files and directories. 
● You can copy one or more files to a new path. 
cp file1 file2
● The command above copies file1 to file2. Notice that both of these are 
actually relative paths. There will be a copy of file1 in the same directory, and 
its name will be file2. 
Basic Commands
● The following command copies file1 to the /usr/bin directory. 
cp /home/koguz/file1 /usr/bin
● Since a new name is not supplied, the file will be copied using its original 
name. The absolute path of the new file will be /usr/bin/file1. 
● It is also possible to copy a list of files to a new directory. Since there will be 
more than one file, the destination path must be a directory. 
cp file1 file2 file3 /etc/files 
Basic Commands
● When files are copied, the copies take on the default attributes of the user 
performing the copy. Their permissions will be updated. 
● Here are a few options:
○ The -a (--archive) option copies the files and directories and all of their attributes, including 
ownerships and permissions. 
○ The -i (--interactive) option enables interactive mode. In this case, cp will ask for confirmation 
to overwrite an existing file. If you do not supply this option, cp will silently overwrite the files. 
○ The -v (--verbose) option enables the verbose mode, where cp prints informative messages 
as the copy is performed. 
○ The -u (--update) option is the update mode, cp only copies if the files do not exist in the 
destination path, or are newer than the existing corresponding files. 
Basic Commands
● How to copy a directory? 
● The -r (--recursive) option is the recursive mode, copies files and directories. 
● To copy the /home/koguz/Desktop directory to /home/koguz/backup, 
give the following command:
cp -r /home/koguz/Desktop /home/koguz/backup
Basic Commands
● Remember that the single dot (.) was the pointer for the current directory, 
double dots (..) was the pointer for the parent directory. 
● You can use them for relative paths in the cp command. 
● The following command copies all files from /etc to current directory. Notice 
the dot at the end of the command:
cp /etc/* .
Basic Commands
● mv: moves files and directories from one path (=the source), to another path 
(=the destination). 
● It is like the cp command, it even shares its following options: -i, -u, -v
● For example, the following command moves the file to a new location:
mv file1 /usr/local/share
● If the source and target directories are the same, then the file is renamed. 
● The following command renames file1 to file2:
mv file1 file2
Basic Commands
● A list of files can be moved into a directory as well.
● The following command moves the files to directory dir1. This directory must 
exist for this command to work.
mv file1 file2 file3 dir1/
Basic Commands
● rm: Remove directories and files. 
● To remove directories, the recursive option -r (--recursive) must be used.
rm file1 file2
rm -r dir1
● Of course, the interactive and verbose options are also available.
● There is also a -f (--force) option, where the non-existent files are silently 
ignored and the interactive option is overwritten; which means rm never 
prompts for confirmation. 
Basic Commands
● There is no “Recycle Bin” in Linux. 
● If a file is removed, it is gone forever. 
● You should be very careful with the remove command, especially when using 
wildcards. 
● Consider the situation when you want to delete all the HTML files, but instead 
of using wildcard as *.html, a space is used between the star and the dot:
rm * .html
Basic Commands
● To make sure that you are deleting the correct files when using a wildcard, 
check the wildcard with the ls command first. 
● If the correct files are listed, then you can use the rm command. 
Hard and Soft Links
● Files are made up of two parts: 
○ the data part, containing the file’s content
○ the name part, which holds the file’s name.
● Since every file has a name, each file has a hard link by default. 
● Remember that we use the long listing format with the ls command, the 
second column shows the number of hard links of the file. 
● When we create another hard link for the file, we create additional name parts 
that all refer to the same data part. 
Hard and Soft Links
● The system assigns a chain of disk blocks to an inode, which is then 
associated with the name part. 
● Each hard link therefore refers to a specific inode containing the file’s 
contents.
● Let’s create a hard link for a file. 
● To do so, we use the ln command.
● Let’s create another link for dorian.txt and call it gray.txt
ln dorian.txt gray.txt
Hard and Soft Links
● Now that we have created a new hard link, the long listing shows both of 
these files. The hard link column is correctly listed as 2 for dorian.txt and 
gray.txt.
● However, how do we know that they are the same file? 
● There can be two files that have the same time stamp, the same size, etc.
● We can even have the same data contained in two different files. 
● How can we check that they both point to the same file? 
Hard and Soft Links
● The -i (--inode) option of the ls command prints the index number of 
each file.
● What happens if you delete one of these files? 
● When is the file really deleted? 
Hard and Soft Links
● The data part of the file is deleted when the last hard link to the file is deleted.
● So, to completely remove a file, all of its hard links must be deleted. 
● There are two important limitations to hard links:
○ A hard link cannot reference a file outside its own file system. This means a link may not 
reference a file that is not on the same partition as the link itself. 
○ A hard link may not reference a directory. 
Hard and Soft Links
● Soft links (symbolic links) were created to overcome the limitations of the hard 
links.
● They work with a special type of file that contains a text pointer to the 
referenced file or directory. 
● The ln command, with the -s (--symbolic) option is used to create symbolic 
links.
ln -s dorian.txt lordhenry.txt
Hard and Soft Links
● The symbolic name is actually a path. 
● The symbolic link will look for the file using this path. Therefore, if the target 
file is moved (or deleted), the link will be broken. 
● The size of the symbolic link is very small, since it is only a link, not the 
original file. 
Hard and Soft Links
● Why do we need symbolic links? 
● Suppose we have a library: libXfont.so.1.4.1 
● When a program is compiled, it is usually linked to this shared object (or 
dynamic library). 
● However, updates are common, and the next minor version might be 
libXfont.so.1.5.0
● When this new minor update arrives, the executables won’t be able to locate 
the shared object and will terminate with an error message. 
Hard and Soft Links
● As can be seen in the screenshot, most of the libraries are given a symbolic 
link, with a major version number.
● In this case, symbolic link libXfont.so.1 points to libXfont.so.1.4.1
● When a new minor update arrives, libXfont.so.1 will point to the update. 
● So the executables will run without noticing any change. 
Command Types
● An executable program: The command is an executable file, compiled 
or interpreted (a script), that resides in a directory. The usual locations are 
/bin, /usr/bin, etc. You can use the which command to locate the path of a 
command.
● A command built into shell itself: Similar to cd, there are some shell 
built-in commands. 
● A shell function: Functions are small bash scripts that are incorporated 
into the shell. We will learn how to write and make them available to the shell.
● An alias: We can derive new commands from existing ones. 
Command Types
● How do you know which is which? 
● The easiest way is to use the type command. 
Manuals
● Manuals are the best references when you are stuck. 
● There are manuals for the executable files, as we have seen earlier.
● However, there are also manuals for administrative commands, programming 
interfaces, file formats, etc. 
● These are called sections and you refer to them as you wish. 
● The following slide contains the list of sections from (Shotts, Jr, 2012). 
Manuals
● For example, there is a sleep function in C, and a sleep command as well. 
● If we type man sleep, we get the sleep command manual page.
● Since man supports many sections, it displays the first matched entry.
● You can search using whatis command, which gives a short description of 
the command. 
● It also displays the manual page section number. 
● To read the third section, the one about the C, we use the following 
command:
man 3 sleep 

More commands for survival
● We can copy, move, remove files, explore file system, etc.
● But there are not fun if we can’t create files using other commands. 
● The date command displays or sets time and date. 
● The whoami command displays the username of the current user.
● The uptime command shows how long the system has been running.
● The uname command prints the operating system name.
● The who command displays the list of users currently logged on to the 
system.
Compressing & Decompressing
● You will need to compress and decompress using the command line. 
● The ZIP format is not very common on Unix systems.
● Mostly, tarballs (tar.gz) are used. 
● A tarball is made up of an archive (tar) and a compression (gzip). 
● It is also possible to use other compression formats, like bzip2. 
● To create a tarball, use the tar command with options c,z,f
○ c: create new archive
○ z: using gzip
○ f: file path
● tar -czf tarball.tar.gz file1 file2
Compressing & Decompressing
● You can extract the archive using the -x option:
tar -xzf tarball.tar.gz
● If you want to list the contents of a tarball:
tar -tvf tarball.tar.gz
● Get familiar with tarballs, they’re almost the default on UNIX systems. 
tar
https://xkcd.com/1168/ 

Compressing & Decompressing
● You can use the familiar ZIP compression as well:
zip file.zip file1 file2
● You can uncompress with unzip:
unzip myfile.zip
● Notice that you need to use the recursive option with zip, if you want to 
compress a directory with all subdirectories and files:
zip -r file.zip theDirectory
● See the manual pages for more information.
Finding Files
● You can use the find command to search a given directory, and its 
subdirectories, for files based on a variety of attributes. 
● The very basic form is as follows
find /home/koguz
● This finds “all files” in /home/koguz. Of course, we can include more options.
● One of the options is the file type. You can use d for a directory, f for a regular 
file, and l for a symbolic link.
find /home/koguz -type d
will only find the directories in the given path. 
Finding Files
● Another popular option is providing a name. You can use wildcards here as 
well. 
find /home/koguz -type f -name “*.txt”

Finding Files
● Another option is file size:
find /home/koguz -type f -name “*.txt” -size +10k
● You can use c for bytes, k for kilobytes, M for megabytes and G for gigabytes. 
● You can use more options, but they are left for you, the audience, to find out. 
Important Directories
● Now that you know how to search, delete, move files, let’s quickly review 
some important directories in a Linux distribution. 
● /bin: contains binaries (programs) that must be present for the system to boot 
and run. 
● /boot: contains the Linux kernel, initial RAM disk image and the boot loader.
● /dev: is a special directory that contains device nodes. Devices are files, too.
● /etc: contains all of the system-wide configuration files. 
● /home: contains the home directories of the users. 
● /lib: contains the shared libraries
● /media and /mnt: in modern systems, media, in older systems, mnt directory 
was used to mount external drives. 
Important Directories
● /opt: is for installing optional software
● /proc: is a special directory used by the kernel as a virtual file system. These 
files contain peep holes into the kernel itself. The files are readable and will 
give you a picture of how the kernel sees your computer. 
● /root: is the home of the root user.
● /sbin: contains system binaries that only the root has the right to run. 
● /tmp: is for temporary storage used by different programs. It is emptied every 
time the system boots. 
● /usr: contains all programs and support files used by regular users.
● /var: directory holds various databases, log files, user mail, etc. 
Exercise CE350.01 (1)
● Run every command in this presentation on your own Unix box (i.e., a 
computer that runs a Unix-like operating system). 
● Create a backup directory at your home. 
● Copy all the files (not directories) that start with c in the /usr/bin directory to 
backup directory at your home. 
● Copy files that end with ‘a’ in the backup directory to the parent directory. 
● Run the following command in home directory: touch k1 k2 k3 k4
● Now, copy files k1, k2, k3, k4 to backup directory. 
Exercise CE350.01 (2)
● Answer the following questions:
○ What does ls -alh do? Explain the options. 
○ In wildcards, metacharacters mean something else, for example a star (*) matches any 
number of characters. What happens when square brackets are used?
○ How do you rename a file? Give an example.
○ What is the command to ZIP a directory? 
References
● Quigley, E. (2005), UNIX Shells by Example
● Shotts Jr., W. E. (2012), The Linux Command Line, A Complete Introduction.