ETHICAL DECISION MAKING
What is Ethics?
Socratic Beginnings
Reflecting on Priorities and Motives
◦ eating meat or being a vegetarian (or vegan)
◦ owning a gun
◦ traditional or electric car
◦ Taylor Swift travelling with private jet for personal reasons
◦ marriage
◦ sacrificing animals for religious purposes
◦ relations with robots
◦ What kind of a practical use has an ethics course in a university?
What guides us while making ethical 
decisions?
◦ making a decision
◦ attention/observation
◦ dialogue/discussion (organize your options; review the rights; evaluate the effects)
◦ assumptions
◦ proposals – actions and policies to be adapted
◦ test
What guides us while making ethical 
decisions?
◦ doing the right thing
◦ values
◦ virtues
◦ principles
◦ beneficence (promotion of welfare)
◦ autonomy (respect for human dignity; capacity to shape one’s own destiny)
◦ justice (determination of rights, rules, rewards, and dues)
What is Ethics?
◦ “ethos” 
◦ “moral principles that govern a person's behavior or the conducting of an 
activity”
◦ moral principles, moral codes and standards, ideals, virtues
◦ moral philosophy
◦ right & wrong / good & bad
◦ practical knowledge
Socratic Beginnings
◦ “gadfly over the back of Athens”
◦ “unexamined life is not worth living”
◦ rationality
◦ dialogue
◦ “know yourself”

The Purpose of Ethical Thinking
◦ building a personality / character
◦ shaping our identity
◦ making choices / judging actions
◦ changing and improving oneself
Ethical Environment
◦ ethics  the self
◦ “know yourself” / conscience & character
◦ ethics  the world
◦ “ethical climate/environment”
Ethical Environment
◦ Nuremberg Laws (1935) -- “Law of the Reich Citizen”, “Blood Protection Law”
◦ The laws excluded German Jews from Reich citizenship and prohibited them from
marrying or having sexual relations with persons of "German or related blood."
◦ Ancillary ordinances to the laws disenfranchised Jews and deprived them of most
political rights.
◦ The Nuremberg Laws did not define a "Jew" as someone with particular religious
beliefs. Instead, anyone who had three or four Jewish grandparents was defined as a
Jew, regardless of whether that individual identified himself or herself as a Jew or
belonged to the Jewish religious community.
Ethical Values between Science and
Philosophy: The Case of Ethan Couch
Ethan Couch, 16 years old, drove his car while he was drunk and caused
the deaths of four people. “At his trial, a psychologist testified for the
defense that growing up in a very affluent, permissive family had not
taught him right from wrong. Whether or not this argument was just a
lawyer’s clever trick, it highlighted the possibility that we indeed have to be
exposed to ideas of right and wrong as children in order to recognize them
as significant later in life. (…) In 2016, a Texas judge ordered him to serve
2 years in prison, 180 days for each of the four victims.”
What Ethics is NOT? 
◦ feelings
◦ “If something feels right, it must be ethical.”
◦ self-interest
◦ “If it benefits me, then it’s ethical.”
◦ egocentrism
◦ religion
◦ “Morality comes only from religion.”
◦ dogmatism
What Ethics is NOT? 
◦ what society approves
◦ “If most people think it’s right, then it must be
ethical.”
◦ conformism (contra freedom)
◦ law
◦ “If it’s legal, it must be ethical.”
◦ moralism
◦ “Being ethical means judging others and imposing
moral rules on them.”