SE 410
Software Framework Applications
Week 1: Introduction
INSTRUCTOR
Asst. Prof. Dr. Serhat UZUNBAYIR
E-mail: uzunbayir.serhat@ieu.edu.tr
Room: A 310
Office Hours: TBD

Course objectıves
The objective of this course is to present to students the concept of 
software framework and how to implement it for various purposes.
● Understand how .NET has changed in recent releases
● Select the appropriate C# language features for any task
● Learn when to use the new features and when to stick with older ones
● Examine the range of functionality in .NET class libraries
● Apply these class libraries to practical programming tasks
● Explore numerous small additions to .NET that improve expressiveness

Learnıng outcomes
The students who succeeded in this course;
● Describe the concept of software framework.
● Identify the 3-tier software architecture.
● Discuss the protocols behind web services.
● Utilize software framework to build applications.
● Implement mechanisms and techniques for the deployment 
and configuration of .NET applications.
Materıals - TEXT BOOK
Programming C# 12: Build Cloud, Web, and 
Desktop Applications 
1st Edition
by Ian Griffiths

Materıals - SUGGESTED MATERIALS
C# 12 and .NET 8 - Modern Cross-Platform 
Development Fundamentals - Eighth Edition: 
Start building websites and services with 
ASP.NET Core 8, Blazor, and EF Core 8 
by Mark J Price
C# 12 in a Nutshell: The Definitive 
Reference 1st Edition 
by Joseph Albahari

evaluatıon
Project: 30%
Midterm Exam: 30%
Final Exam: 40%
Weekly subjects
Week Subjects 
1     Introduction 
2     Concepts 
3     Data Types, Strings, Loops, Patterns
4     Arrays, Collections, Generics
5     Delegates, Lambdas and Events
6     LINQ 
7     Assemblies, Files, Streams
  
Weekly subjects
Week Subjects 
8     GUI Programming I 
9     Midterm Exam 
10     GUI Programming II
11     Three-tier Architecture
12     Web Application Programming I
13     Web Application Programming II
14      Project Presentations
15      Final Review

syllabus
https://se.ieu.edu.tr/en/syllabus/type/read/id/SE+410

Introducıng c#
● C# is used for many kinds of applications: 
○ Websites
■ Stack Overflow (Q&A site)
■ Microsoft.com
○ Cloud-based systems
■ Azure Functions (serverless apps in C#)
■ Orchard Core CMS (open-source, modular cloud-ready CMS)
○ Artificial intelligence
■ ML.NET (machine learning library in .NET for sentiment 
analysis, recommendation engines)
■ Chatbots integrated into Microsoft Teams using C#
Introducıng c# (cont’d)
○ IoT devices
■ .NET NanoFramework (runs C# on microcontrollers)
■ Home automation apps (smart thermostats, sensors)
○ Desktop applications
■ Visual Studio IDE itself is partly written in C#
■ Paint.NET (popular free image editor)
○ Mobile apps
■ Xamarin-based apps (now .NET MAUI) → e.g., UPS Mobile App
■ BBC Good Food app (built with Xamarin in C#)
○ Games
■ Unity Engine games (C# is the scripting language)
● Pokémon Go
● Monument Valley
Introducıng c# (cont’d)
● C#, along with the supporting runtime, libraries, and 
tools known collectively as .NET, has been center 
stage for Windows developers for over 20 years.
● .NET is cross-platform and open source, enabling 
applications and services written in C# to run on 
operating systems including Android, iOS, macOS, 
Linux, and of course Windows.
Introducıng c# (cont’d)
● New versions of C# has enhanced developer productivity.
○ Pattern-matching features (more expressive and succinct code) 
○ Primary constructors and collection expressions (reduce verbosity 
in some common scenarios)
○ Type-system enhancements (more flexible libraries, and better 
compile-time diagnostics).
Why c#?
● Simple, readable and easy to use
● All about developer productivity
● A multi-paradigm programming language
● A flexible general-purpose language
● Runs on a solid well-engineered .NET runtime
● Cross-platform
● Mature, popular and in very active development
Why c#? (cont’d)
● Offers object-oriented features, generics, and functional 
programming.
● Supports both dynamic and static typing. It provides 
powerful list- and set-oriented features, thanks to 
Language Integrated Query (LINQ). 
● Has support for asynchronous programming. 
● The various development environments that support C# all 
offer a wide range of productivity-enhancing features.

Why c#? (cont’d)
● Open-source and led by Microsoft
● An active and vibrant community
● A well-documented language
● Has built-in design patterns and best practices
● Can leverage an extensive collection of libraries
● Can run very fast
● Can run in the browser
● Developers are in high demand
Managed Code and the CLR
● Traditional Compilers
○ Source → Machine Code → Runs directly on CPU
○ Output = Native code (CPU instructions)
● C# Compilers
○ Source → Binary code Intermediate Language (IL)
○ Runs on CLR (via JIT compilation)
○ Called Managed Code
● Benefits of CLR
○ Portability
○ Security
○ Memory management
Managed Code and the CLR (cont’d)

C# Standards and Implementations
● European Computer Manufacturers Association (ECMA) has 
written specifications that define language and runtime 
behavior for C# implementations. 
● This has made it possible for multiple implementations of 
C# and the runtime to emerge. 
C# Standards and Implementations (cont’d)
● There are four in widespread use: 
○ .NET Core (an open-source platform for building desktop, web, 
and mobile applications that can run natively on any operating 
system), 
○ Mono (the implementation of .NET on platforms other than 
Windows),
○ .NET Native (a precompilation technology for building and 
deploying Windows apps that is included with Visual Studio 
2015),
○ .NET Framework (a framework that provides a runtime 
environment and libraries). 
C# Standards and Implementations (cont’d)
● When a version of .NET goes out of support, this does not 
deprecate components that target it. 
● .NET supports using components built for older versions, 
so if you find a component on NuGet that targets .NET 
5.0, you can use it on .NET 8.0. 
● It would be wise to check whether such a component is 
still under active development.
.net vs c#
● .NET is a software framework with a runtime environment 
and a set of libraries for running applications. 
● It offers a consistent programming model and supports 
multiple languages -> C#, Visual Basic, and F#. 
● Includes various components:
○ CLR
○ the Base Class Library (BCL) 
○ a collection of development tools
.net vs c# (cont’d)
● C# is an object-oriented programming language. 
● It is designed to be simple, expressive, and type-safe, 
offering a balance between high-level abstraction and 
low-level control. 
● C# is often associated with .NET development as it is the 
primary language used for building .NET applications.
.net vs c# (cont’d)
● It is crucial to understand that .NET and C# are not 
synonymous but rather closely related. 
● C# is one of the primary programming languages that can 
be used within the .NET framework. 
● In other words, C# is a language that runs on the .NET 
platform and leverages its rich libraries and runtime 
environment.
Visual Studio, Visual Studio Code, and JetBrains Rider
● Microsoft offers two desktop development environments: 
○ Visual Studio Code
○ Visual Studio
● Both provide the basic features—such as a text editor, build 
tools, and a debugger—but Visual Studio provides the most 
extensive support for developing C# applications, whether 
those applications will run on Windows or other platforms. 
● Microsoft is not the only option: 
○ the developer productivity company JetBrains sells a fully fledged .NET IDE 
called Rider, which runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
Anatomy of a Simple Program

Wrıtıng a unıt  test

Test results

A Faılıng test

namespaces
● Namespaces bring order and structure to what would otherwise be a 
horrible mess.
● The .NET runtime libraries contain thousands of types, and there 
are many more out there in NuGet packages both from Microsoft and 
third parties, not to mention the classes you will write yourself. 
● There are two problems that can occur when dealing with this many 
named entities:
○ First, it becomes hard to guarantee uniqueness. 
○ Second, it can become challenging to discover the API you need; unless you know or 
can guess the right name, it’s difficult to find what you need from an 
unstructured list of tens of thousands of things.
● Namespaces solve both of these problems.
Namespaces (cont’d)
● Most .NET types are defined in a namespace. 
● There are certain conventions for namespaces that you’ll 
see a lot. 
● For example, types in .NET’s runtime libraries are in 
namespaces that start with System.
● The namespace usually gives a clue as to the purpose of a 
type.
● Namespaces also provide a way to ensure uniqueness.
summary
● We’ve now seen the basic structure of C# programs. 
● We will look at types and their members in much more 
detail in Chapter 3, but first, Chapter 2 will deal with 
the code that lives inside methods, where we express what 
we want our programs to do.
Any questıons?